"Social Science Fiction":
 Its Importance in the Works of Isaac Asimov.
---------------------------------------------

 PART I

  "Social science fiction?"

  Science fiction is a term familiar to many people.  This is especially true
due to the tremendous influence of television.	But the term "social science
fiction," although not heard too often, is a term is descriptive of most of
today's science fiction literature.

  "But what does it mean?"

  Social science fiction is the term given to literature "which is concerned
with the impact of scientific advance upon human beings."(1) It is to be set
apart from the adventure or "gadget" science fiction which is characterized by
simplistic plots and flat characters.  Social science fiction is concerned with
the problems presented to humanity by technology and science.


  Asimov's first exposure to science fiction occurred one day while he was
working in his father's candy store.  Although Asimov worked in this store all
the way up into his college studies, he still found time for reading.  But his
father forbade Isaac from reading the dime novels on the shelves in his store.
One day, though, a magazine appeared on the shelf entitled, "Science Wonder
Stories." Since the word science was included in the name, young Asimov was
permitted to read it.


  				PART II


  As has been mentioned, many of Asimov's works deal in the area of social
science fiction.  The effects of technology and science is an important theme
in many of his short stories and novels and can be seen readily.  Asimov also
presents the problems of present day society to us by paralleling these
problems in a future society.

  The next story, "Runaround" takes place on the planet Mercury.  Being another
world, Asimov has chosen two new characters, George Powell and Michael Donovan.
These two are field-testers for the largest robot manufacturer, U.S.  Robotics
and Mechanical Men Inc.  They are on Mercury to test out a new series of robot
specially designed to go out onto the hot surface of Mercury and retrieve a
valuable element, selenium.  Asimov plays on our intellect as he poses some
interesting problems to Powell and Donovan which are finally resolved by
Asimov's famous Three Laws of Robotics:

	       I. A robot cannot harm a human nor through
		  inaction allow a human being to come to harm.

	       II. A robot must obey all orders given to it
		   by human beings except where such orders
		   would contradict with the first.

	       III. A robot must preserve itself except
		    where such action would contradict the
		    first or second laws.(7)

  Probably the most important theme presented in this story though is the idea,
"Is man really in control?"(9) In the story, the Machines have taken over and
now control Earth's economic resources.  Asimov tells us that if we are not
careful, our own technology may take us over.


			       PART III

"Nevertheless, it is difficult to put one's finger on precisely what element
or elements so fascinate readers.  From just about any formal perspective, The
Foundation Trilogy is seriously flawed.  The characters are undifferentiated
and one-dimensional.  Stylistically, the novels are disasters, and Asimov's ear
for dialogue is simply atrocious.  The characters speak with a monotonous
rhythm and impover- ished vocabulary characteristic of American teenagers'
popular reading during the Forties and Fifties; the few exceptions are no
better - e.g.  the Mule, who, in disguise of the Clown, speaks a pseudo-archaic
courtly dialect, or Lord Dorwin who speaks like Elmer Fudd, or the archetypal
Jewish mother who can say, "So shut your mouth, Pappa.  Into you anybody could
bump." The distinctive vocab-ulary traits are as a rule ludicrous:  God!  is
replaced by Galaxy!, and when a character really wants to express his disgust
or anger, he cries "Son-of-a--Spacer!" or "I don't care an electron!" To
describe the characters' annoyance, arrogance, or bitterness, Asimov uses again
and again one favorite adjective or adverb, sardonic(ly):

	  Sutt's eyes gleamed sardonically.
	  Mallow stared him down sardonically.
	  Riose looked sardonic.
	  [Devers] stared at the two with sardonic belligerence.
	  "What's wrong, trader?" he asked sardonically.
	  The smooth lines of Pritcher's dark face twitched
	  sardonically.
	  But Anthor's eyes opened, quite suddenly, and fixed
	  themselves sardonically on Munn's countenance.


  But overall, I felt The Foundation Trilogy was a finely done piece of work by
Asimov.  Considering that it was originally written as serialized short stories
for science fiction "pulp magazines," Asimov has done a fine job integrating it
all into one continuous story.


